 North of the 9th Infantry sector of the 2nd Infantry Division front along the Naktong , the US 23rd Infantry Regiment on August 29 had just relieved the 3rd Battalion of the US 38th Infantry Regiment , which in turn had only a few days before relieved the US 21st Infantry Regiment of the US 24th Infantry Division . On August 1 , the 23rd Regiment was in a new sector of which it had only a limited knowledge . It took over a 16 @,@ 000 yards ( 15 @,@ 000 m ) Naktong River front without its 3rd Battalion which had been attached to the US 1st Cavalry Division to the north . Colonel Paul L. Freeman , the regimental commander , deployed the 1st Battalion on the high ground along the river with the three companies abreast . The 1st Battalion , under US Lieutenant Colonel Claire E. Hutchin , Jr . , outposted the hills with platoons and squads . He placed the 2nd Battalion in a reserve position 8 miles ( 13 km ) behind the 1st Battalion and in a position where it commanded the road net in the regimental sector . On August 31h the 2nd Division moved E Company south to a reserve position in the 9th Infantry sector . 
 Two roads ran through the regimental sector from the Naktong River to Changnyong . The main road bent south along the east bank of the river to Pugong @-@ ni and then turned northeast to Changnyong . A northern secondary road curved around marshland and lakes , the largest of which was Lake U @-@ p 'o , to Changnyong . In effect , the 1st Battalion of the 23rd Regiment guarded these two approach routes to Changnyong . 
 The 42 men of the 2nd Platoon , B Company , 23rd Infantry held outpost positions on seven hills covering a 2 @,@ 600 yards ( 2 @,@ 400 m ) front along the east bank of the Naktong north of Pugong @-@ ni . Across the river in the rice paddies they could see , in the afternoon of August 31 , two large groups of North Korean soldiers . Occasionally artillery fire dispersed them . Just before dark , the platoon saw a column of North Koreans come out of the hills and proceed toward the river . They immediately reported to the battalion command post . The artillery forward observer , who estimated the column at 2 @,@ 000 people , thought they were refugees . Freeman immediately ordered the artillery to fire on the column , reducing its number . However the North Koreans continued their advance . 
 At 21 : 00 the first shells of what proved to be a two @-@ hour North Korean artillery and mortar preparation against the American river positions of 2nd Platoon . As the barrage rolled on , North Korean infantry crossed the river and climbed the hills in the darkness under cover of its fire . At 23 : 00 the barrage lifted and the North Koreans attacked 2nd Platoon , forcing it from the hill after a short fight . Similar assaults took place elsewhere along the battalion outpost line . 
 On the regimental left along the main Pugong @-@ ni @-@ Changnyong road North Korean soldiers completely overran C Company by 0300 September 1 . Only seven men of C Company could be accounted for , and three days later , after all the stragglers and those cut off behind North Korean lines had come in , there were only 20 men in the company . As the North Korean attack developed during the night , 1st Battalion succeeded in withdrawing a large part of its force , less C Company , just north of Lake U @-@ p 'o and the hills there covering the northern road into Changnyong , 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) east of the river and 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) west of the town . B Company lost heavily in this action . 
 When word of the disaster that had overtaken 1st Battalion reached regimental headquarters , Freeman obtained the release of G and F Companies from 2nd Division reserve and sent the former to help 1st Battalion and the latter on the southern road toward Pugong @-@ ni and C Company . Major Lloyd K. Jenson , executive officer of the 2nd Battalion , accompanied F Company down the Pugong @-@ ni road . This force was unable to reach C Company , but Jenson collected stragglers from it and seized high ground astride this main approach to Changnyong near Ponch 'o @-@ ri above Lake Sanorho , and went into a defensive position there . The US 2nd Division released E Company to the regiment and the next day it joined F Company to build up what became the main defensive position of the 23d Regiment in front of Changnyong . North Korean troops during the night passed around the right flank of 1st Battalion 's northern blocking position and reached the road three miles behind him near the division artillery positions . The 23rd Infantry Headquarters and Service Companies and other miscellaneous regimental units finally stopped this penetration near the regimental command post 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) northwest of Changnyong . 
 
 = = = US 2nd Division split = = = 
 
 Before the morning of 1 September had passed , reports coming in to US 2nd Division headquarters made it clear that North Koreans had penetrated to the north @-@ south Changnyong @-@ Yongsan road and cut the division in two ; the 38th and 23d Infantry Regiments with the bulk of the division artillery in the north were separated from the division headquarters and the 9th Infantry Regiment in the south . Keiser decided that this situation made it advisable to control and direct the divided division as two special forces . Accordingly , he placed the division artillery commander , Brigadier General Loyal M. Haynes , in command of the northern group . Haynes ' command post was 7 miles ( 11 km ) north of Changnyong . Task Force Haynes became operational at 10 : 20 , September 1 . Southward , in the Yongsan area , Keiser placed Brigadier General Joseph S. Bradley , Assistant Division Commander , in charge of the 9th Infantry Regiment , the 2nd Engineer Combat Battalion , most of the 72nd Tank Battalion , and other miscellaneous units of the division . This southern grouping was known as Task Force Bradley . 
 All three regiments of the NK 2nd Division @-@ the 4th , 17th , and 6th , in line from north to south @-@ crossed during the night to the east side of the Naktong River into the 23rd Regiment sector . The NK 2nd Division , concentrated in the Sinban @-@ ni area west of the river , had , in effect , attacked straight east across the river and was trying to seize the two avenues of advance into Changnyong above and below Lake U @-@ p 'o . On August 31 , 1950 , Lake U @-@ p 'o was a large body of water although in most places very shallow . 
 At dawn September 1 , Keiser at 2nd Division headquarters in Muan @-@ ni , 7 miles ( 11 km ) east of Yongsan on the Miryang road , felt his division was in the midst of a crisis . The massive North Korean attack had made deep penetrations everywhere in the division sector except in the north in the zone of the 38th Infantry . The NK 9th Division had effected major crossings of the Naktong at two principal points against the US 9th Infantry ; the NK 2nd Division in the meantime had made three major crossings against the US 23rd Infantry ; and the NK 10th Division had begun crossing more troops in the Hill 409 area near Hyongp 'ung in the US 38th Infantry sector . At 08 : 10 Keiser telephoned Eighth Army headquarters and reported the heaviest and deepest North Korean penetrations were in the 9th Infantry sector . 
 Liaison planes rose from the division strip every hour to observe the North Korean progress and to locate US 2nd Infantry Division front @-@ line units . Communication from division and regimental headquarters to nearly all the forward units was broken . Beginning at 09 : 30 and continuing throughout the rest of the day , the light aviation section of the division artillery located front @-@ line units cut off by the North Koreans , and made fourteen airdrops of ammunition , food , water , and medical supplies . As information slowly built up at division headquarters it became apparent that the North Koreans had punched a hole 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) wide and 8 miles ( 13 km ) deep in the middle of the division line and made less severe penetrations elsewhere . The front @-@ line battalions of the US 9th and 23rd Regiments were in various states of disorganization and some companies had virtually disappeared . Keiser hoped he could organize a defense along the Changnyong @-@ Yongsan road east of the Naktong River , and prevent North Korean access to the passes eastward leading to Miryang and Ch 'ongdo . 
 
 = = = Reinforcements = = = 
 
 At 09 : 00 Walker requested the US Air Force to make a maximum effort along the Naktong River from Toksong @-@ dong , just above the US 2nd Division boundary , southward and to a depth of 15 miles ( 24 km ) west of the river . He wanted the Air Force to isolate the battlefield and prevent further North Korean reinforcements and supplies from moving across the river in support of the North Korean spearhead units . The Far East Command requested the US Navy to join in the air effort , and the US Seventh Fleet turned back from its strikes in the Inch 'on @-@ Seoul area and sped southward at full steam toward the southern battle front . Walker came to the US 2nd Division front at 12 : 00 and ordered the division to hold at all costs . He had already ordered ground reinforcements to the Yongsan area . 
 During the morning of 1 September , Walker weighed the news coming in from his southern front , wavering in a decision as to which part of the front most needed his Pusan Perimeter reserves . Since midnight the NK I Corps had broken his Pusan Perimeter in two places @-@ the NK 2nd and 9th Divisions in the US 2nd Division sector , and the NK 7th Division and NK 6th Division in the US 25th Division sector , below the junction of the Nam and Naktong Rivers . In the US 2nd Division sector North Korean troops were at the edge of Yongsan , the gateway to the corridor leading 12 miles ( 19 km ) eastward to Miryang and the main Pusan @-@ Mukden railroad and highway . 
 Eighth Army had in reserve three understrength infantry regiments and the 2 @-@ battalion British 27th Infantry Brigade which was not yet completely equipped and ready to be placed in line : The 1st Provisional Marine Brigade at Changwon , 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) northeast of Masan , preparing for movement to the port of Pusan ; the US 27th Infantry Regiment of the 25th Division which had arrived at Masan only the night before at 20 : 30 to relieve the 5th Regimental Combat Team , which was then to join the 24th Division in the Taegu area ; and the US 19th Infantry Regiment of the US 24th Infantry Division , then with that division 's headquarters at Kyongsan southeast of Taegu . Walker alerted both the 24th Division headquarters , together with its 19th Regiment , and the 1st Provisional Marine Brigade to move at a moment 's notice ; the 24th Division either to the 2nd or 25th Division fronts , and the marines to an unannounced destination . 
 As the morning passed , General Walker decided that the situation was most critical in the Naktong Bulge area of the US 2nd Division sector . There the North Koreans threatened Miryang and with it the entire Eighth Army position . At 11 : 00 Walker ordered US Marine Corps Brigadier General Edward A. Craig , commanding the 1st Provisional Marine Brigade , to prepare the marines to move at once . The marines made ready to depart for the Naktong Bulge at 13 : 30 . 
 
 = = = North Korean advance = = = 
 
 The situation on the front was chaotic during the day September 1 . The North Koreans at one place had crossed at the Kihang ferry , captured Agok , and scattered A Company , 9th Infantry at its positions from Agok northward . A Company withdrew to positions on the ridge line back of the river . From there at daylight the men could see North Korean soldiers on many of the ridges surrounding them , most of them moving east . After several hours , 2nd Platoon of A Company sent a patrol down the hill to Agok to obtain supplies abandoned there during the night , returning later with much needed water , rations , and ammunition . 
 Later in the morning North Korean barges crossed the Naktong below A Company . The company sent a squad with a light machine gun to the southern tip of the ridge overlooking Agok to take these troops under fire . When the squad reached the tip of the ridge they saw that a North Korean force occupied houses at its base . The company hit these houses with artillery . The North Koreans broke from the houses , running for the river . At this the light machine gun at the tip of the ridge took them under fire , as did another across the Naktong to the south in the US 25th Infantry Division sector . Proximity fuze artillery fire decimated this group . Combined fire from all weapons inflicted an estimated 300 casualties on this North Korean force . In the afternoon , US aircraft dropped food and ammunition to the company ; only part of it was recovered . The 1st Battalion ordered A Company to withdraw the company that night . 
 During the withdraw , however , A Company ran into a sizable North Korean force and had scattered in the ensuing fight . Most of the company , including its commander were killed at close range . In this desperate action , Private First Class Luther H. Story , a weapons squad leader , fought so tenaciously that he was awarded the Medal of Honor . Badly wounded , Story refused to be a burden to those who might escape , and when last seen was still engaging North Korean at close range . Of those in the company , approximately ten men escaped to friendly lines . The next morning , under heavy fog , the group made its way by compass toward Yongsan . From a hill at 12 : 00 , after the fog had lifted , the men looked down on the Battle of Yongsan which was then in progress . That afternoon 20 survivors of the company merged into the lines of the 72nd Tank Battalion near Yongsan . Stragglers from this position continued to stream in the next few days as well . 
 
 = = = The end of Task Force Manchu = = = 
 
 In the meantime , Task Force Manchu was still holding its position along the Naktong River , about 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) north of where A Company had been destroyed on the southern end of the line . The perimeter position taken by the men of D and H Companies , 9th Infantry , who had started up the hill before the North Koreans struck , was on a southern knob of Hill 209 , 0 @.@ 5 miles ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) south of B Company 's higher position . In addition to the D and H Company men , there were a few from the Heavy Mortar Platoon and one or two from B Company . Altogether , 60 to 70 men were in the group . The group had an SCR @-@ 300 radio , a heavy machine gun , two light machine gun , a M1918 Browning Automatic Rifle , about 20 M1 Garand rifles , and about 40 carbines or pistols . Schmitt assumed command of the group . 
 During the night Schmitt established radio communication with the 1st Battalion , 9th infantry . When daylight came Schmitt and his group saw that they were surrounded by North Koreans . One force occupied the higher knob half a mile above them , formerly held by B Company . Below them , North Koreans continued crossing the river and moving supplies forward to their combat units , some of them already several miles eastward . The North Koreans quickly discovered Task Force Manchu group . They first attacked it at 14 : 00 that afternoon , and were repulsed . That night an estimated company attacked three times , pressing the fight to close quarters , but failed each time to penetrate the tight US perimeter . Daylight of the second day disclosed many North Korean dead on the steep slopes outside the perimeter . 
 In the afternoon of September 2 Schmitt radioed 1st Battalion for an airdrop of supplies . A US plane attempted the drop , but the perimeter was so small and the slopes so steep that virtually all the supplies went into North Korean hands . The men in the perimeter did , however , recover from a drop made later at 19 : 00 some supplies and ammunition . Private First Class Joseph R. Ouellette , of H Company , left the perimeter to gather weapons , ammunition , and grenades from the North Korean dead . On several occasions he was attacked , and on one such occasion a North Korean soldier suddenly attacked Ouellette , who killed the North Korean in hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat . 
 That same afternoon , the North Koreans sent an American prisoner up the hill to Schmitt with the message , " You have one hour to surrender or be blown to pieces . " Failing in frontal infantry attack to reduce the little defending force , the North Koreans now meant to take it under mortar fire . Only 45 minutes later North Korean antitank fire came in on the knob and two machine guns from positions northward and higher on the slope of Hill 209 swept the perimeter . Soon , mortars emplaced on a neighboring high finger ridge eastward registered on Schmitt 's perimeter and continued firing until dark . The machine gun fire forced every man to stay in his foxhole . The lifting of the mortar fire after dark was the signal for renewed North Korean infantry attacks , all of which were repulsed . But the number of killed and wounded within the perimeter was growing , and supplies were diminishing . There were no medical supplies except those carried by one aid man . 
 The third day , September 3 , the situation worsened . The weather was hot and ammunition , food and supplies were nearly completely exhausted . Since the previous afternoon , North Korean mortar barrages had alternated with infantry assaults against the perimeter . Survivors later estimated there were about twenty separate infantry attacks repulsed . Two North Korean machine guns still swept the perimeter whenever anyone showed himself . Dead and dying US troops were in almost every foxhole . Mortar fragments destroyed the radio and this ended all communication with other US units . Artillery fire and air strikes requested by Schmitt never came . Some North Koreans worked their way close to the perimeter and threw grenades into it . Six times Ouellette leaped from his foxhole to escape grenades thrown into it . In this close action Ouellette was killed . Most of the foxholes of the perimeter received one or more direct mortar hits in the course of the continuing mortar fire . One of these killed Schmitt on September 3 . The command passed now to First Lieutenant Raymond J. McDoniel of D Company , senior surviving officer . 
 At daylight on the morning of 4 September only two officers and approximately half the men who had assembled on the hill , were alive . As the day passed , with ammunition down to about one clip per man and only a few grenades left and no help in sight , McDoniel decided to abandon the position that night . When it got dark the survivors would split into small groups and try to get back to friendly lines . That evening after dark the North Koreans launched another weak attack against the position . At 22 : 00 , McDoniel and Caldwell and 27 enlisted men slipped off the hill in groups of four . Master Sergeant Travis E. Watkins , still alive in his paralyzed condition , refused efforts of evacuation , saying that he did not want to be a burden to those who had a chance to get away . He asked only that his carbine be loaded and placed on his chest with the muzzle under his chin . Like Oullette , he would also win the Medal of Honor for his actions . Of the 29 men who came off the hill the night of September 4 , 22 escaped to friendly lines , many of them following the Naktong downstream , hiding by day and traveling by night , until they reached the lines of the US 25th Infantry Division . 
 Members of Task Force Manchu who escaped from Hill 209 brought back considerable intelligence information of North Korean activity in the vicinity of the Paekchin ferry crossing site . At the ferry site the North Koreans had put in an underwater bridge . A short distance downstream , each night they placed a pontoon bridge across the river and took it up before dawn the next morning . Carrying parties of 50 civilians guarded by four North Korean soldiers crossed the river continuously at night , an estimated total of 800 @-@ 1 @,@ 000 carriers being used at this crossing site . 
 
 = = = Changyong = = = 
 
 North of the US 9th Infantry and the battles in the Naktong Bulge and around Yongsan , the US 23d Infantry Regiment after daylight of September 1 was in a very precarious position . Its 1st Battalion had been driven from the river positions and isolated 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) westward . Approximately 400 North Koreans now overran the regimental command post , compelling Freeman to withdraw it about 600 yards ( 550 m ) . There , 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) northwest of Changnyong , the US 23rd Infantry Headquarters and Headquarters Company , miscellaneous regimental units , and regimental staff officers checked the North Koreans in a 3 @-@ hour fight . 
 The North Koreans advanced to Changnyong itself during the afternoon of September 2 , and ROK National Police withdrew from the town . North Koreans were in Changnyong that evening . With his communications broken southward to the 2nd Infantry Division headquarters and the 9th Infantry , Haynes during the day decided to send a tank patrol down the Yongsan road in an effort to re @-@ establish communication . C Company , 72nd Tank Battalion , led its tanks southward . They had to fight their way down the road through several roadblocks . Of the three tanks that started , only the lead tank got through to Yongsan . There , it delivered an overlay of Task Force Haynes ' positions to Bradley . 
 Still farther northward in the zone of the US 38th Infantry the North Koreans were also active . After the North Korean breakthrough during the night of August 31 , Keiser had ordered the 2nd Battalion , 38th Infantry , to move south and help the 23rd Infantry establish a defensive position west of Changnyong . In attempting to do this , the battalion found North Korean troops already on the ridges along the road . They had penetrated to Hill 284 overlooking the 38th Infantry command post . This hill and Hill 209 dominated the rear areas of the regiment . At 06 : 00 September 3 , 300 North Koreans launched an attack from Hill 284 against the 38th Regiment command post . The regimental commander organized a defensive perimeter and requested a bombing strike which was denied him because the enemy target and his defense perimeter were too close to each other . But the Air Force did deliver rocket and strafing strikes . 
 This fight continued until September 5 . On that day F Company captured Hill 284 killing 150 North Koreans . From the crest he and his men watched as many more North Koreans ran into a village below them . Directed artillery fire destroyed the village . Among the abandoned North Korean materiel on the hill , Schauer 's men found twenty @-@ five American BARs and submachine guns , a large American radio , thirty boxes of unopened American fragmentation and concussion grenades , and some American rations . 
 
 = = = 1 @-@ 23rd Infantry isolated = = = 
 
 Meanwhile , during these actions in its rear , the 1st Battalion , 23rd Infantry , was cut off 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) west of the nearest friendly units . On September 1 the regiment ordered it to withdraw to the Changnyong area . At 14 : 00 a tank @-@ infantry patrol was sent down the road , but it reported that an estimated North Korean battalion held the mountain pass just eastward of the battalion 's defense perimeter . Upon receiving this report the battalion commander requested permission by radio to remain in his present position and try to obstruct the movement of North Korean reinforcements and supplies . That evening Freeman approved this request , and 1st Battalion spent three days in the isolated positions . During this time C @-@ 47 Skytrain planes supplied the battalion by airdrops . 
 On the morning of September 1 , 3rd Battalion , 38th Infantry moved in an attack westward from the 23rd Regiment command post near Mosan @-@ ni to open the road to the 1st Battalion . On the second day of the fighting at the pass , the relief force broke through the roadblock with the help of air strikes and artillery and tank fire . The advanced elements of the battalion joined 1st Battalion at 17 : 00 September 2 . That evening , North Koreans strongly attacked the 3rd Battalion , 38th Infantry , on Hill 209 north of the road and opposite 1st Battalion , driving one company from its position . 
 On September 4 , Haynes changed the boundary between the 38th and 23rd Infantry Regiments , giving the northern part of the 23rd 's sector to the 38th Infantry , thus releasing 1st Battalion for movement southward to help the 2nd Battalion defend the southern approach to Changnyong . The 1st Battalion , 23rd Infantry , about 1 @,@ 100 men strong when the attack began , was now down to a strength of approximately 600 men . The 23rd Infantry now made plans to concentrate all its troops on the position held by its 2nd Battalion on the Pugong @-@ ni @-@ Changnyong road . The 1st Battalion moved there and took a place on the left flank of the 2nd Battalion . At the same time the regimental command post moved to the rear of this position . In this regimental perimeter , the 23rd Infantry fought a series of hard battles . Simultaneously it had to send combat patrols to its rear to clear infiltrating North Koreans from Changnyong and from its supply road . 
 
 = = = Battle of Yongsan = = = 
 
 On the morning of September 1 the 1st and 2nd Regiments of the NK 9th Division , in their first offensive of the war , stood only a few miles short of Yongsan after a successful river crossing and penetration of the American line . The 3rd Regiment had been left at Inch 'on , but division commander Major General Pak Kyo Sam felt the chances of capturing Yongsan were strong . 
 On the morning of September 1 , with only the shattered remnants of E Company at hand , the US 9th Infantry Regiment , US 2nd Infantry Division had virtually no troops to defend Yongsan . Keiser in this emergency attached the 2nd Engineer Combat Battalion to the regiment . The US 72nd Tank Battalion and the 2nd Division Reconnaissance Company also were assigned positions close to Yongsan . The regimental commander planned to place the engineers on the chain of low hills that arched around Yongsan on the northwest . 
 A Company , 2nd Engineer Combat Battalion , moved to the south side of the Yongsan @-@ Naktong River road ; D Company of the 2nd Engineer Battalion was on the north side of the road . Approximately 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) west of Yongsan an estimated 300 North Korean troops engaged A Company in a fire fight . M19 Gun Motor Carriages of the 82nd AAA Battalion supported the engineers in this action , which lasted several hours . Meanwhile , with the approval of General Bradley , D Company moved to the hill immediately south of and overlooking Yongsan . A platoon of infantry went into position behind it . A Company was now ordered to fall back to the southeast edge of Yongsan on the left flank of D Company . There , A Company went into position along the road ; on its left was C Company of the Engineer battalion , and beyond C Company was the 2nd Division Reconnaissance Company . The hill occupied by D Company was in reality the western tip of a large mountain mass that lay southeast of the town . The road to Miryang came south out of Yongsan , bent around the western tip of this mountain , and then ran eastward along its southern base . In its position , D Company not only commanded the town but also its exit , the road to Miryang . 
 North Koreans had also approached Yongsan from the south . The US 2nd Division Reconnaissance Company and tanks of the 72nd Tank Battalion opposed them in a sharp fight . In this action , Sergeant First Class Charles W. Turner of the Reconnaissance Company particularly distinguished himself . He mounted a tank , operated its exposed turret machine gun , and directed tank fire which reportedly destroyed seven North Korean machine guns . Turner and this tank came under heavy North Korean fire which shot away the tank 's periscope and antennae and scored more than 50 hits on it . Turner , although wounded , remained on the tank until he was killed . That night North Korean soldiers crossed the low ground around Yongsan and entered the town from the south . 
 At 09 : 35 September 2 , while the North Koreans were attempting to destroy the engineer troops at the southern edge of Yongsan and clear the road to Miryang , Walker spoke by telephone with Major General Doyle O. Hickey , Deputy Chief of Staff , Far East Command in Tokyo . He described the situation around the Perimeter and said the most serious threat was along the boundary between the US 2nd and US 25th Infantry Divisions . He described the location of his reserve forces and his plans for using them . He said he had started the 1st Provisional Marine Brigade toward Yongsan but had not yet released them for commitment there and he wanted to be sure that General of the Army Douglas MacArthur approved his use of them , since he knew that this would interfere with other plans of the Far East Command . Walker said he did not think he could restore the 2nd Division lines without using them . Hickey replied that MacArthur had the day before approved the use of the US Marines if and when Walker considered it necessary . A few hours after this conversation Walker , at 13 : 15 , attached the 1st Provisional Marine Brigade to the US 2nd Division and ordered a co @-@ ordinated attack by all available elements of the division and the marines , with the mission of destroying the North Koreans east of the Naktong River in the 2nd Division sector and of restoring the river line . The marines were to be released from 2nd Division control as soon as this mission was accomplished . 
 A decision was reached that the marines would attack west at 08 : 00 on September 3 astride the Yongsan @-@ Naktong River road ; the 9th Infantry , B Company of the 72nd Tank Battalion , and D Battery of the 82d AAA Battalion would attack northwest above the marines and attempt to re @-@ establish contact with the US 23rd Infantry ; the 2nd Engineer Combat Battalion , remnants of the 1st Battalion , 9th Infantry , and elements of the 72nd Tank Battalion would attack on the left flank , or south , of the marines to reestablish contact with the 25th Division . Eighth Army now ordered the US 24th Infantry Division headquarters and the US 19th Infantry Regiment to move to the Susan @-@ ni area , 8 miles ( 13 km ) south of Miryang and 15 miles ( 24 km ) east of the confluence of the Nam River and the Naktong River . There it was to prepare to enter the battle in either the 2nd or 25th Division zone . 
 The American counteroffensive of September 3 – 5 west of Yongsan , according to prisoner statements , resulted in one of the bloodiest debacles of the war for a North Korean division . Even though remnants of the NK 9th Division , supported by the low strength NK 4th Division , still held Obong @-@ ni Ridge , Cloverleaf Hill , and the intervening ground back to the Naktong on September 6 , the division 's offensive strength had been spent at the end of the American counterattack . The NK 9th and 4th divisions were not able to resume the offensive . 
 
 = = = NK 2nd Division destroyed = = = 
 
 The NK 2nd Division made a new effort against the 23rd Infantry 's perimeter in the predawn hours of September 8 , in an attempt to break through eastward . This attack , launched at 02 : 30 and heavily supported with artillery , penetrated F Company . It was apparent that unless F Company 's position could be restored the entire regimental front would collapse . When all its officers became casualties , First Lieutenant Ralph R. Robinson , adjutant of the 2nd Battalion , assumed command of the company . With North Koreans rapidly infiltrating his company 's position and gaining its rear , Robinson in the darkness made his way through them 500 yards ( 460 m ) to A Company 's position . There he obtained that company 's reserve platoon and brought it back to F Company . He accomplished the dangerous and difficult task of maneuvering it into the gap in F Company 's lines in darkness and heavy rain . 
 The attack tapered off with the coming of daylight , but that night it resumed . The North Koreans struck repeatedly at the defense line . This time they continued the fighting into the daylight hours of 9 September . The Air Force then concentrated strong air support over the regimental perimeter to aid the ground troops . Casualties came to the aid stations from the infantry companies in an almost steady stream during the morning . All available men from Headquarters Company and special units were formed into squads and put into the fight at the most critical points . At one time , the regimental reserve was down to six men . When the attack finally ceased shortly after 12 : 00 the 23rd Regiment had an estimated combat efficiency of only 38 percent . 
 This heavy night and day battle cost the NK 2nd Division most of its remaining offensive strength . The medical officer of the NK 17th Regiment , 2nd Division , captured a few days later , said that the division evacuated about 300 men nightly to a hospital in Pugong @-@ ni , and that in the first two weeks of September the 2nd Division lost 1 @,@ 300 killed and 2 @,@ 500 wounded in the fighting west of Changnyong . Even though its offensive strength was largely spent by September 9 , the division continued to harass rear areas around Changnyong with infiltrating groups as large as companies . Patrols daily had to open the main supply road and clear the town . 
 North Korean and US troops remained locked in combat along the Naktong River for several more days . The North Koreans ' offensive capability was largely destroyed , and the US troops resolved to hold their lines barring further attack . 
 
 = = = North Korean withdrawal = = = 
 
 The UN counterattack at Inchon collapsed the North Korean line and cut off all their main supply and reinforcement routes . On September 19 the UN discovered the North Koreans had abandoned much of the Pusan Perimeter during the night , and the UN units began advancing out of their defensive positions and occupying them . Most of the North Korean units began conducting delaying actions attempting to get as much of their army as possible into North Korea . The North Koreans withdrew from the Masan area first , the night of September 18 – 19 . After the forces there , the remainder of the North Korean armies withdrew rapidly to the North . The US units rapidly pursued them north , passing over the Naktong River positions , which were no longer of strategic importance . 
 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 
 The North Korean 2nd and 9th Divisions were almost completely destroyed in the battles . The 9th Division had numbered 9 @,@ 350 men at the beginning of the offensive on September 1 . The 2nd Division numbered 6 @,@ 000 . Only a few hundred from each division returned to North Korea after the fight . The majority of the North Korean troops had been killed , captured or deserted . All of NK II Corps was in a similar state , and the North Korean army , exhausted at Pusan Perimeter and cut off after Inchon , was on the brink of defeat . 
 By this time , the US 2nd Infantry Division suffered 1 @,@ 120 killed , 2 @,@ 563 wounded , 67 captured and 69 missing during its time at Pusan Perimeter . This included about 180 casualties it suffered during the First Battle of Naktong Bulge the previous month . American forces were continually repulsed but able to prevent the North Koreans from breaking the Pusan Perimeter . The division had numbered 17 @,@ 498 on September 1 , but was in excellent position to attack despite its casualties . The 1st Provisional Marine Brigade suffered 185 killed and around 500 wounded during the Battle of Pusan Perimeter , most of which probably occurred at Yongsan . 
 Of all the North Korean attacks along the Pusan Perimeter , the Second Battle of Naktong Bulge is seen by historians as the most serious threat . It was the battle in which the North Koreans made the most substantial gains , splitting the US 2nd Infantry Division in half and briefly capturing Yongsan , where they were very close to breaching through to the US forces ' supply lines and threatening other divisions ' rear areas . However , once again the fatal weakness of the North Korean Army had cost it victory after an impressive initial success — its communications and supply were not capable of exploiting a breakthrough and of supporting a continuing attack in the face of massive air , armor , and artillery fire that could be concentrated against its troops at critical points . By September 8 , the North Korean attacks in the area had been repulsed . 
 
 
 = Hed PE = 
 
 Hed PE , also known as ( hed ) Planet Earth and stylized as ( həd ) p.e. , is an American rock band from Huntington Beach , California . Formed in 1994 , the band performs a style of music which it refers to as " G @-@ punk " , a fusion of punk rock and gangsta rap . 
 After releasing three albums on Jive Records , Hed PE left the label to record independently , eventually signing with Suburban Noize Records in 2006 . Since 2006 , the band has become known for its involvement in the 9 / 11 Truth movement , referencing it in many of their song lyrics and concerts , as well as the concept of the album New World Orphans . To date , they have released nine studio albums , one live album and two compilation albums . 
 
 = = History = = 
 
 
 = = = Formation and major @-@ label debut ( 1994 – 1999 ) = = = 
 
 The band was formed by vocalist Jared Gomes , formerly of The Clue , also known as " M.C.U.D. " ( MC Underdog ) , and guitarist Wes Geer , who became friends amidst the Orange County hardcore punk scene . Gomes and Geer recruited guitarist Chizad , bassist Mawk , drummer B.C. Vaught and DJ Product © 1969 . They named the group " Hed " , which stands for " higher education " . The band built a following with their energetic performances at local venues , and released the self @-@ financed extended play , Church of Realities . Legal issues forced Hed to change their name , adding " PE " , which stood for " Planet Earth " . 
 Hed PE signed with Jive Records , releasing their self @-@ titled debut album in 1997 . In his review of the album , Allmusic 's Steve Huey wrote " There are some slow and / or unfocused moments [ ... ] but overall , its aggression will probably play well with late- ' 90s metal and punk fans . " Due to the label 's contractual terms and the disappointing sales of the album , the band found themselves unable to repay the cash advances given to them by Jive . Gomes is quoted as saying " We had these romantic visions of the music industry , and we thought it would be cool to be a punk band on a rap label . So we fulfilled that dream , but it was also probably the worst thing that could have happened . [ ... ] We 've had offers from Sony and others that we can 't take because we owe Jive so much money . " 
 
 = = = Broke and Blackout ( 2000 – 2004 ) = = = 
 
 On June 6 , 2000 , Hed PE appeared on the tribute album Nativity in Black II , covering Black Sabbath 's " Sabbra Cadabra " . Hed PE released their second studio album , Broke on August 22 , 2000 . It peaked at No. 63 on the Billboard 200 , while its first single , " Bartender " , peaked at No. 23 on the Billboard Mainstream Rock Tracks chart and at No. 27 on the Modern Rock Tracks chart . Allmusic 's Jason D. Taylor wrote : " Broke may have not found as much success in the competitive mainstream market as some would have liked , and even despite its distinct departure from the group 's debut , it is an album that shows more vision than other rap @-@ tinged rock albums to come out in 2000 . " The most negative response to the album came from critics who viewed its lyrics as misogynistic . 
 On October 27 , 2000 , Gomes was arrested for possession of marijuana while the band was performing in Waterbury , Connecticut . He was released on a US $ 1 @,@ 500 bond . In 2001 , Hed PE performed on the Ozzfest tour alongside bands such as Korn , Static @-@ X , and System of a Down . A music video for " Killing Time " , the second single from Broke , was produced in promotion of the film 3000 Miles to Graceland , which featured the song on its soundtrack . 
 Hed PE released their third studio album , Blackout , on March 18 , 2003 . It peaked at No. 33 on the Billboard 200 , while its title track peaked at No. 21 on the Mainstream Rock Tracks chart and at No. 32 on the Modern Rock Tracks chart . Allmusic 's Johnny Loftus wrote that " While it expands on melodic elements that had previously played a supporting role in the band 's sound , Blackout also delivers truckloads of crushing guitar and pounding rhythm . And whether or not it is the presence of a top @-@ line producer , ( hed ) pe have figured out a way to imbue their aggressive mix of heavy rock and hip @-@ hop with some serious hooks . " Guitarist Jaxon joined the band in early 2004 . He is the fourth person to fill this position . 
 
 = = = Only in Amerika ( 2004 ) = = = 
 
 Hed PE left Jive Records , releasing their fourth studio album , Only in Amerika , on Koch Records on October 19 , 2004 . It peaked at No. 20 on the Top Independent Albums chart and at No. 186 on the Billboard 200 . In his review of the album , Johnny Loftus wrote " It wants to be a confrontational megaphone in the ear of conservatives , but Jahred 's torrential rhetoric is too messy and blatantly offensive to incite anything but superficial anger , and the music -- though occasionally explosive -- takes a backseat to the ranting . " 
 
 = = = Suburban Noize Records and New Album Evolution ( 2006 – 2015 ) = = = 
 
 In 2006 , Hed PE signed with Suburban Noize Records , recording their fifth studio album , Back 2 Base X. The album was intended as a return to the basics of rock music , and did not rely as heavily on studio enhancement as previous releases . The album was released on June 6 , 2006 , the same day as The Best of ( həd ) Planet Earth , a compilation album produced by Jive Records without the band 's authorization or consent . Back 2 Base X peaked at No. 12 on the Independent Albums chart , and at No. 154 on the Billboard 200 . Allmusic 's Rob Theakston wrote that " Back 2 Base X suffers from the same problems as Amerika : it tries to be conceptual in thought à la Tool and vicious in its political commentary à la Fugazi or System of a Down , but somehow falls short by sounding like an angry stoner on a soapbox . It won 't win any new fans , but existing fans of ( hed ) pe 's work won 't be turning their backs away from the band in anger anytime soon , either . " 
 On June 26 , 2007 , the band released their sixth studio album , Insomnia . It peaked at No. 16 on the Independent Albums chart , and at No. 138 on the Billboard 200 . The album 's lead single , " Suffa " , became one of the most requested tracks at Sirius Satellite Radio 's Hard Attack , while the song 's music video was voted one of the Top 10 of 2007 on MTV 's Headbangers Ball . Hed PE released their first live album , The D.I.Y. Guys , in 2008 . On January 13 , 2009 , they released their seventh studio album , New World Orphans . It was released in three different versions ; each contains a different set of bonus tracks . In 2009 , drummer Trauma joined the band . He is the sixth person to fill this position . The band 's eighth studio album , Truth Rising , was released on October 26 , 2010 to mixed reviews . Hed pe played the " Local Heroes Tour " in the fall of 2012 and played with Flipsyde in San jose on Sunday October 7 , 2012 . In an interview , frontman Jared Gomes stated that their album for 2013 titled Ascension would be released within the first half of 2014 . Towards the end of 2013 , DJ Product mysteriously left the band with no explanation and no comment from the other members . On 1 / 1 / 2014 , Frontman Jahred Gomes stated on the band 's official Facebook that the new upcoming ( hed ) PE album will be named " Evolution " and to be released within the year . 
 On May 13 , 2014 , On the band 's official Facebook page , they released the official announcement of when the band 's new album Evolution will hit stores . The album is set for release July 22 , 2014 . They also released a teaser of the tone of the new album on their Facebook page and soon after , the track " One More Body " . 
 In 2015 , it was confirmed that 12 @-@ year guitarist Jaxon Benge and original bassist Mark Young had left the band . They were replaced by guitarist Greg " Gregzilla " Harrison and bassist Kurt Blankenship , leaving vocalist and founding member Jared Gomes as the group 's only remaining original talent . 
 
 = = Style = = 
 
 
 = = = Music and lyrics = = = 
 
 Hed PE performs a style of music which they have referred to as " G @-@ punk " , a phrase inspired by the term " G @-@ funk " , itself a reference to the P @-@ Funk collective . Hed PE 's music is a fusion of styles ranging from hip hop , reggae , and ska to hard rock , punk , and heavy metal . Other elements that have been incorporated into this style include blues , funk , jazz and industrial . Jared Gomes ' vocal style ranges from melodic singing to rapping , screaming , and death growls . The band 's lyrics draw from a number of subjects , including the existence of extraterrestrial life , criticism of organized religion , the 9 / 11 Truth movement , cannabis use and sexual intercourse . 
 Gomes , in addition to the 9 / 11 Truth movement , has expressed support for social liberal politicians such as Nancy Pelosi and president Barack Obama . Previously however , Gomes ' 2004 lyrics for Only in Amerika expressed support for nationalism , and called for retaliation against Al Qaeda for the 9 / 11 terrorist attacks . 
 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 
 The band 's influences include HEM , Beastie Boys , Black Sabbath , Bob Marley , Led Zeppelin , Nine Inch Nails , Snoop Dogg , Cypress Hill , Notorious B.I.G. and Rage Against the Machine . Hed PE 's second album , Broke , incorporated classic rock and world music influences , while Back 2 Base X was influenced by classic punk bands such as the Sex Pistols and the Clash , Insomnia was influenced by thrash metal bands such as Slayer , and New World Orphans was influenced by Suicidal Tendencies and Minor Threat . Guitarist Jaxon has been credited for encouraging a heavier , hardcore punk @-@ influenced musical style . 
 
 = = Band members = = 
 
 Jared ( Paulo Sergio Gomes ) — lead vocals ( 1994 – current ) 
 Major Trauma ( Jeremiah Stratton ) — drums ( 2008 – current ) 
 Gregzilla ( Greg Harrison ) — guitar ( 2015 – current ) 
 Kid Bass ( Kurt Blankenship ) — bass ( 2015 – current ) 
 
 = = = Former members = = = 
 
 Ken Sachs ( The Finger ) — keyboard ( 1994 – 1996 ) 
 Chad Benekos ( Chizad ) — guitar ( 1994 – 2002 ) 
 Wesley Geer ( Wesstyle , Wes Geer ) — guitar ( 1994 – 2003 ) 
 Ben C. Vaught ( B.C. ) — drums ( 1994 – 2003 ) 
 Doug Boyce ( DJ Product © 1969 ) — turntables , samples ( 1994 – 2013 ) 
 Mark Young ( Mawk ) — bass ( 1994 – 2015 ) 
 Sonny Mayo — guitar ( 2002 – 2003 ) 
 Jackson Benge ( Jaxon ) — guitar ( 2004 – 2015 ) 
 Christopher Hendrich — drums ( 2004 ) 
 Mark " Moke " Bistany — drums ( 2004 – 2006 ) 
 Devin Lebsack — drums ( 2006 – 2007 ) 
 Anthony " Tiny Bubz " Biuso — drums ( 2007 – 2008 ) 
 
 = = = Timeline = = = 
 
 
 = = Discography = = 
 
 Studio albums 
 Church of Realities ( 1995 ) 
 Hed PE ( 1997 ) 
 Broke ( 2000 ) 
 Blackout ( 2003 ) 
 Only in Amerika ( 2004 ) 
 Back 2 Base X ( 2006 ) 
 Insomnia ( 2007 ) 
 New World Orphans ( 2009 ) 
 Truth Rising ( 2010 ) 
 Evolution ( 2014 ) 
 Forever ! ( 2016 ) 
 
 
 = Ironclad warship = 
 
 An ironclad is a steam @-@ propelled warship protected by iron or steel armor plates used in the early part of the second half of the 19th century . The ironclad was developed as a result of the vulnerability of wooden warships to explosive or incendiary shells . The first ironclad battleship , Gloire , was launched by the French Navy in November 1859 . The British Admiralty had been considering armored warships since 1856 and prepared a draft design for an armored corvette in 1857 ; in early 1859 the Royal Navy started building two iron @-@ hulled armored frigates , and by 1861 had made the decision to move to an all @-@ armored battle fleet . After the first clashes of ironclads ( both with wooden ships and with one another ) took place in 1862 during the American Civil War , it became clear that the ironclad had replaced the unarmored ship of the line as the most powerful warship afloat . This type of ship would come to be very successful in the American Civil War . 
 Ironclads were designed for several roles , including as high seas battleships , coastal defense ships , and long @-@ range cruisers . The rapid evolution of warship design in the late 19th century transformed the ironclad from a wooden @-@ hulled vessel that carried sails to supplement its steam engines into the steel @-@ built , turreted battleships and cruisers familiar in the 20th century . This change was pushed forward by the development of heavier naval guns ( the ironclads of the 1880s carried some of the heaviest guns ever mounted at sea ) , more sophisticated steam engines , and advances in metallurgy which made steel shipbuilding possible . 
 The quick pace of change meant that many ships were obsolete as soon as they were finished , and that naval tactics were in a state of flux . Many ironclads were built to make use of the ram or the torpedo , which a number of naval designers considered the important weapons of naval combat . There is no clear end to the ironclad period , but towards the end of the 1890s the term ironclad dropped out of use . New ships were increasingly constructed to a standard pattern and designated battleships or armored cruisers . 
 
 = = The ironclad = = 
 
 The ironclad became technically feasible and tactically necessary because of developments in shipbuilding in the first half of the 19th century . According to naval historian J. Richard Hill : " The ( ironclad ) had three chief characteristics : a metal @-@ skinned hull , steam propulsion and a main armament of guns capable of firing explosive shells . It is only when all three characteristics are present that a fighting ship can properly be called an ironclad . " Each of these developments was introduced separately in the decade before the first ironclads . 
 
 = = = Steam propulsion = = = 
 
 In the 18th and early 19th centuries fleets had relied on two types of major warship , the ship of the line and the frigate . The first major change to these types was the introduction of steam power for propulsion . While paddle steamer warships had been used from the 1830s onwards , steam propulsion only became suitable for major warships after the adoption of the screw propeller in the 1840s . 
 Steam @-@ powered screw frigates were built in the mid @-@ 1840s , and at the end of the decade the French Navy introduced steam power to its line of battle . The desire for change came from the ambition of Napoleon III to gain greater influence in Europe , which required a challenge to the British at sea . The first purpose @-@ built steam battleship was the 90 @-@ gun Napoléon in 1850 . Napoléon was armed as a conventional ship @-@ of @-@ the @-@ line , but her steam engines could give her a speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ) , regardless of the wind conditions : a potentially decisive advantage in a naval engagement . 
 The introduction of the steam ship @-@ of @-@ the @-@ line led to a building competition between France and Britain . Eight sister ships to Napoléon were built in France over a period of ten years , but the United Kingdom soon managed to take the lead in production . Altogether , France built ten new wooden steam battleships and converted 28 from older ships of the line , while the United Kingdom built 18 and converted 41 . 
 
 = = = Explosive shells = = = 
 
 The era of the wooden steam ship @-@ of @-@ the @-@ line was brief , because of new , more powerful naval guns . In the 1820s and 1830s , warships began to mount increasingly heavy guns , replacing 18- and 24 @-@ pounder guns with 32 @-@ pounders on sailing ships @-@ of @-@ the @-@ line and introducing 68 @-@ pounders on steamers . Then , the first shell guns firing explosive shells were introduced following their development by the French Général Henri @-@ Joseph Paixhans , and by the 1840s were part of the standard armament for naval powers including the French Navy , Royal Navy , Imperial Russian Navy and United States Navy . It is often held that the power of explosive shells to smash wooden hulls , as demonstrated by the Russian destruction of an Ottoman squadron at the Battle of Sinop , spelled the end of the wooden @-@ hulled warship . The more practical threat to wooden ships was from conventional cannon firing red @-@ hot shot , which could lodge in the hull of a wooden ship and cause a fire or ammunition explosion . Some navies even experimented with hollow shot filled with molten metal for extra incendiary power . 
 
 = = = Iron armor = = = 
 
 The use of iron instead of wood as the primary material of ships ' hulls began in the 1830s ; the first " warship " with an iron hull was the gunboat Nemesis , built by Laird for the East India Company in 1839 . There followed , also from Laird , the first full @-@ blown warships with metal hulls , the 1842 steam frigates Guadelupe and Montezuma for the Mexican navy . But a thin iron skin , while not being susceptible to fire or lethal splintering like wood , was not the same thing as providing iron armor calculated to stop enemy gunfire . 
 Following the demonstration of the power of explosive shells against wooden ships at the Battle of Sinop , and fearing that his own ships would be vulnerable to the Paixhans guns of Russian fortifications in the Crimean War , Emperor Napoleon III ordered the development of light @-@ draft floating batteries , equipped with heavy guns and protected by heavy armor . Experiments made during the first half of 1854 proved highly satisfactory , and on 17 July 1854 , the French communicated to the British Government that a solution had been found to make gun @-@ proof vessels and that plans would be communicated . After tests in September 1854 , the British Admiralty agreed to build five armoured floating batteries on the French plans , establishing the important Thames and Millwall Iron Works within the docks . 
 The French floating batteries were deployed in 1855 as a supplement to the wooden steam battle fleet in the Crimean War . The role of the battery was to assist unarmored mortar and gunboats bombarding shore fortifications . The French used three of their ironclad batteries ( Lave , Tonnante and Dévastation ) in 1855 against the defenses at the Battle of Kinburn on the Black Sea , where they were effective against Russian shore defences . They would later be used again during the Italian war in the Adriatic in 1859 . The British floating batteries Glatton and Meteor arrived too late to participate to the action at Kinburn . The British planned to use theirs in the Baltic Sea against the well @-@ fortified naval base at Kronstadt . 
 The batteries have a claim to the title of the first ironclad warships but they were capable of only 4 knots ( 7 km / h ) under their own power : they operated under their own power at the Battle of Kinburn , but had to be towed for long range transit . They were also arguably marginal to the work of the navy . The brief success of the floating ironclad batteries convinced France to begin work on armored warships for their battlefleet . 
 
 = = Early ironclad ships and battles = = 
 
 By the end of the 1850s it was clear that France was unable to match British building of steam warships , and to regain the strategic initiative a dramatic change was required . The result was the first ocean @-@ going ironclad , the Gloire , begun in 1857 and launched in 1859 . 
 Gloire 's wooden hull was modelled on that of a steam ship of the line , reduced to one deck , sheathed in iron plates 4 @.@ 5 inches ( 110 mm ) thick . She was propelled by a steam engine , driving a single screw propeller for a speed of 13 knots ( 24 km / h ) . She was armed with thirty @-@ six 6 @.@ 4 @-@ inch ( 160 mm ) rifled guns . France proceeded to construct 16 ironclad warships , including two more sister ships to Gloire , and the only two @-@ decked broadside ironclads ever built , Magenta and Solférino . 
 The Royal Navy had not been keen to sacrifice its advantage in steam ships of the line , but was determined that the first British ironclad would outmatch the French ships in every respect , particularly speed . A fast ship would have the advantage of being able to choose a range of engagement which could make her invulnerable to enemy fire . The British specification was more a large , powerful frigate than a ship @-@ of @-@ the @-@ line . The requirement for speed meant a very long vessel , which had to be built from iron . The result was the construction of two Warrior @-@ class ironclads ; HMS Warrior and HMS Black Prince . The ships had a successful design , though there were necessarily compromises between ' sea @-@ keeping ' , strategic range and armour protection ; their weapons were more effective than that of Gloire , and with the largest set of steam engines yet fitted to a ship they could steam at 14 @.@ 3 knots ( 26 @.@ 5 km / h ) . Yet the Gloire and her sisters had full iron @-@ armour protection along the waterline and the battery itself . Warrior and Black Prince ( but also the smaller Defence and Resistance ) were obliged to concentrate their armour in a central ' citadel ' or ' armoured box ' , leaving many main deck guns and the fore and aft sections of the vessel unprotected . The use of iron in the construction of Warrior also came with some drawbacks ; iron hulls required more regular and intensive repairs than wooden hulls , and iron was more susceptible to fouling by marine life . 
 By 1862 , navies across Europe had adopted ironclads . Britain and France each had sixteen either completed or under construction , though the British vessels were larger . Austria , Italy , Russia , and Spain were also building ironclads . However , the first battles using the new ironclad ships involved neither Britain nor France , and involved ships markedly different from the broadside @-@ firing , masted designs of Gloire and Warrior . The use of ironclads by both sides in the American Civil War , and the clash of the Italian and Austrian fleets at the Battle of Lissa , had an important influence on the development of ironclad design . 
 
 = = = First battles between ironclads : the U.S. Civil War = = = 
 
 The first use of ironclads in action came in the U.S. Civil War . The U.S. Navy at the time the war broke out had no ironclads , its most powerful ships being six steam @-@ powered unarmoured frigates . Since the bulk of the Navy remained loyal to the Union , the Confederacy sought to gain advantage in the naval conflict by acquiring modern armored ships . In May 1861 , the Confederate Congress voted that $ 2 million be appropriated for the purchase of ironclads from overseas , and in July and August 1861 the Confederacy started work on construction and converting wooden ships . 
 On 12 October 1861 , the CSS Manassas became the first ironclad to enter combat , when she fought Union warships on the Mississippi during the Battle of the Head of Passes . She had been converted from a commercial vessel in New Orleans for river and coastal fighting . In February 1862 , the larger CSS Virginia joined the Confederate Navy , having been rebuilt at Norfolk . Constructed on the hull of USS Merrimack , Virginia originally was a conventional warship made of wood , but she was converted into an iron @-@ covered casemate ironclad gunship , when she entered the Confederate navy . By this time , the Union had completed seven ironclad gunboats of the City class , and was about to complete the USS Monitor , an innovative design proposed by the Swedish inventor John Ericsson . The Union was also building a large armored frigate , the USS New Ironsides , and the smaller USS Galena . 
 The first battle between ironclads happened on 9 March 1862 , as the armored Monitor was deployed to protect the Union 's wooden fleet from the ironclad ram Virginia and other Confederate warships . In this engagement , the second day of the Battle of Hampton Roads , the two ironclads repeatedly tried to ram one another while shells bounced off their armor . The battle attracted attention worldwide , making it clear that the wooden warship was now out of date , with the ironclads destroying them easily . 
 The Civil War saw more ironclads built by both sides , and they played an increasing role in the naval war alongside the unarmored warships , commerce raiders and blockade runners . The Union built a large fleet of fifty monitors modeled on their namesake . The Confederacy built ships designed as smaller versions of the Virginia , many of which saw action , but their attempts to buy ironclads overseas were frustrated as European nations confiscated ships being built for the Confederacy — especially in Russia , the only country to openly support the Union through the war . Only CSS Stonewall was completed , and she arrived in American waters just in time for the end of the war . 
 Through the remainder of the war , ironclads saw action in the Union 's attacks on Confederate ports . Seven Union monitors , including USS Montauk , as well as two other ironclads , the ironclad frigate New Ironsides and a light @-@ draft USS Keokuk , participated in the failed attack on Charleston ; one was sunk . Two small ironclads , CSS Palmetto State and CSS Chicora participated in the defence of the harbor . For the later attack at Mobile Bay , the Union assembled four monitors as well as 11 wooden ships , facing the CSS Tennessee , the Confederacy 's most powerful ironclad and the gunboats CSS Morgan , CSS Gaines , CSS Selma . 
 On the western front , the Union built a formidable force of river ironclads , beginning with several converted riverboats and then contracting engineer James Eads of St. Louis , Missouri to build the City @-@ class ironclads . These excellent ships were built with twin engines and a central paddle wheel , all protected by an armored casement . They had a shallow draft , allowing them to journey up smaller tributaries , and were very well suited for river operations . Eads also produced monitors for use on the rivers , the first two of which differed from the ocean @-@ going monitors in that they contained a paddle wheel ( the USS Neosho and USS Osage ) . 
 Arguably Eads vessels were some of the better ironclads of the Western Flotilla , but there were a number of other vessels that served valiantly with the fleet . All were of varying design , some more successful than others , and some were similar to standard riverboats but with armored side @-@ mounted paddle wheels . All were armed with various smoothbore and some rifled guns . If nothing else the experience of the American Civil War and its wild variety of competing ironclad designs , some more successful ( or disastrous ) than others , confirmed the emerging trade @-@ off or compromises required in applying the latest technological advances in iron armour manufacture , ship construction and gun design — to name a few — also going on in Europe . There was no such thing as a ' perfect ' ironclad which could be invincible in every possible encounter ; ship duels , standing up to forts , Brown & Blue @-@ water operations . 
 The Union ironclads played an important role in the Mississippi and tributaries by providing tremendous fire upon Confederate forts , installations and vessels with relative impunity to enemy fire . They were not as heavily armored as the ocean @-@ going monitors of the Union , but they were adequate for their intended use . More Western Flotilla Union ironclads were sunk by torpedoes ( mines ) than by enemy fire , and the most damaging fire for the Union ironclads was from shore installations , not Confederate vessels . 
 
 = = = Lissa : First fleet battle = = = 
 
 The first fleet battle , and the first ocean battle , involving ironclad warships was the Battle of Lissa in 1866 . Waged between the Austrian and Italian navies , the battle pitted combined fleets of wooden frigates and corvettes and ironclad warships on both sides in the largest naval battle between the battles of Navarino and Tsushima . 
 The Italian fleet consisted of 12 ironclads and a similar number of wooden warships , escorting transports which carried troops intending to land on the Adriatic island of Lissa . Among the Italian ironclads were seven broadside ironclad frigates , four smaller ironclads , and the newly built Affondatore — a double @-@ turretted ram . Opposing them , the Austrian navy had seven ironclad frigates . 
 The Austrians believed their ships to have less effective guns than their enemy , so decided to engage the Italians at close range and ram them . The Austrian fleet formed into an arrowhead formation with the ironclads in the first line , charging at the Italian ironclad squadron . In the melée which followed both sides were frustrated by the lack of damage inflicted by guns , and by the difficulty of ramming — nonetheless , the effective ramming attack being made by the Austrian flagship against the Italian attracted great attention in following years . 
 The superior Italian fleet lost its two ironclads , Re d 'Italia and Palestro , while the Austrian unarmoured screw two @-@ decker SMS Kaiser remarkably survived close actions with four Italian ironclads . The battle ensured the popularity of the ram as a weapon in European ironclads for many years , and the victory won by Austria established it as the predominant naval power in the Adriatic . 
 The battles of the American Civil War and at Lissa were very influential on the designs and tactics of the ironclad fleets that followed . In particular , it taught a generation of naval officers the misleading lesson that ramming was the best way to sink enemy ironclads . 
 
 = = Armament and tactics = = 
 
 The adoption of iron armor meant that the traditional naval armament of dozens of light cannon became useless , since their shot would bounce off an armored hull . To penetrate armor , increasingly heavy guns were mounted on ships ; nevertheless , the view that ramming was the only way to sink an ironclad became widespread . The increasing size and weight of guns also meant a movement away from the ships mounting many guns broadside , in the manner of a ship @-@ of @-@ the @-@ line , towards a handful of guns in turrets for all @-@ round fire . 
 
 = = = Ram craze = = = 
 
 From the 1860s to the 1880s many naval designers believed that the development of the ironclad meant that the ram was again the most important weapon in naval warfare . With steam power freeing ships from the wind , and armor making them invulnerable to shellfire , the ram seemed to offer the opportunity to strike a decisive blow . 
 The scant damage inflicted by the guns of Monitor and Virginia at Battle of Hampton Roads and the spectacular but lucky success of the Austrian flagship SMS Erzherzog Ferdinand Max sinking the Italian Re d 'Italia at Lissa gave strength to the ramming craze . From the early 1870s to early 1880s most British naval officers thought that guns were about to be replaced as the main naval armament by the ram . Those who noted the tiny number of ships that had actually been sunk by ramming struggled to be heard . 
 The revival of ramming had a significant effect on naval tactics . Since the 17th century the predominant tactic of naval warfare had been the line of battle , where a fleet formed a long line to give it the best fire from its broadside guns . This tactic was totally unsuited to ramming , and the ram threw fleet tactics into disarray . The question of how an ironclad fleet should deploy in battle to make best use of the ram was never tested in battle , and if it had been , combat might have shown that rams could only be used against ships which were already stopped dead in the water . 
 The ram finally fell out of favour in the 1880s , as the same effect could be achieved with a torpedo , with less vulnerability to quick @-@ firing guns . 
 
 = = = Development of naval guns = = = 
 
 The armament of ironclads tended to become concentrated in a small number of powerful guns capable of penetrating the armor of enemy ships at range ; calibre and weight of guns increased markedly to achieve greater penetration . Throughout the ironclad era navies also grappled with the complexities of rifled versus smoothbore guns and breech @-@ loading versus muzzle @-@ loading . 
 HMS Warrior carried a mixture of 110 @-@ pounder 7 inch ( 180 mm ) breech @-@ loading rifles and more traditional 68 @-@ pounder smoothbore guns . Warrior highlighted the challenges of picking the right armament ; the breech @-@ loaders she carried , designed by Sir William Armstrong , were intended to be the next generation of heavy armament for the Royal Navy , but were shortly withdrawn from service . 
 Breech @-@ loading guns seemed to offer important advantages . A breech @-@ loader could be reloaded without moving the gun , a lengthy process particularly if the gun then needed to be re @-@ aimed . The Warrior 's Armstrong guns also had the virtue of being lighter than an equivalent smoothbore and , because of their rifling , more accurate . Nonetheless , the design was rejected because of problems which plagued breech @-@ loaders for decades . 
 The weakness of the breech @-@ loader was the obvious problem of sealing the breech . All guns are powered by the explosive conversion of gunpowder into gas . This explosion propels the shot or shell out of the front of the gun , but also imposes great stresses on the gun @-@ barrel . If the breech — which experiences some of the greatest forces in the gun — is not entirely secure , then there is a risk that either gas will discharge through the breech or that the breech will break . This in turn reduces the muzzle velocity of the weapon and can also endanger the gun crew . The Warrior 's Armstrong guns suffered from both problems ; the shells were unable to penetrate the 4 @.@ 5 in ( 118 mm ) armor of Gloire , while sometimes the screw which closed the breech flew backwards out of the gun on firing . Similar problems were experienced with the breech @-@ loading guns which became standard in the French and German navies . 
 These problems influenced the British to equip ships with muzzle @-@ loading weapons of increasing power until the 1880s . After a brief introduction of 100 @-@ pounder or 9 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 240 mm ) smoothbore Somerset Gun , which weighed 6 @.@ 5 tons ( 6 @.@ 6 t ) , the Admiralty introduced 7 @-@ inch ( 178 mm ) rifled guns , weighing 7 tons . These were followed by a series of increasingly mammoth weapons — guns weighing 12 , 25 , 25 , 38 and finally 81 tons , with calibre increasing from 8 @-@ inch ( 203 mm ) to 16 @-@ inch ( 406 mm ) . 
 The decision to retain muzzle @-@ loaders until the 1880s has been criticised by historians . However , at least until the late 1870s , the British muzzle @-@ loaders had superior performance in terms of both range and rate of fire than the French and Prussian breech @-@ loaders , which suffered from the same problems as had the first Armstrong guns . 
 From 1875 onwards , the balance between breech- and muzzle @-@ loading changed . Captain de Bange invented a method of reliably sealing a breech , adopted by the French in 1873 . Just as compellingly , the growing size of naval guns made muzzle @-@ loading much more complicated . With guns of such size there was no prospect of hauling in the gun for re @-@ loading , or even re @-@ loading by hand , and complicated hydraulic systems were required for re @-@ loading the gun outside the turret without exposing the crew to enemy fire . In 1882 , the 81 @-@ ton , 16 @-@ inch ( 406 mm ) guns of HMS Inflexible fired only once every 11 minutes while bombarding Alexandria during the Urabi Revolt . The 100 @-@ ton , 450 mm ( 17 @.@ 72 inch ) guns of Caio Duilio could each fire a round every 15 minutes . 
 In the Royal Navy , the switch to breech @-@ loaders was finally made in 1879 ; as well as the significant advantages in terms of performance , opinion was swayed by an explosion on board HMS Thunderer caused by a gun being double @-@ loaded , a problem which could only happen with a muzzle @-@ loading gun . 
 The calibre and weight of guns could only increase so far . The larger the gun , the slower it would be to load , the greater the stresses on the ship 's hull , and the less the stability of the ship . The size of the gun peaked in the 1880s , with some of the heaviest calibres of gun ever used at sea . HMS Benbow carried two 16 @.@ 25 @-@ inch ( 413 mm ) breech @-@ loading guns , each weighing 110 tons — no British battleship would ever carry guns as large . The Italian 450 mm ( 17 @.@ 72 inch ) guns would be larger than any gun fitted to a battleship until the 18 @.@ 1 @-@ inch ( 460 mm ) armament of the Japanese Yamato class of World War II . One consideration which became more acute was that even from the original Armstrong models , following the Crimean War , range and hitting power far exceeded simple accuracy , especially at sea where the slightest roll or pitch of the vessel as ' floating weapons @-@ platform ' could negate the advantage of rifling . American ordnance experts accordingly preferred smoothbore monsters whose round shot could at least ' skip ' along the surface of the water . Actual effective combat ranges , they had learned during the Civil War , were comparable to those in the Age of Sail — though a vessel could now be smashed to pieces in only a few rounds . Smoke and the general chaos of battle only added to the problem . As a result , many naval engagements in the ' Age of the Ironclad ' were still fought at ranges within easy eyesight of their targets , and well below the maximum reach of their ships ' guns . 
 Another method of increasing firepower was to vary the projectile fired or the nature of the propellant . Early ironclads used black powder , which expanded rapidly after combustion ; this meant cannons had relatively short barrels , to prevent the barrel itself slowing the shell . The sharpness of the black powder explosion also meant that guns were subjected to extreme stress . One important step was to press the powder into pellets , allowing a slower , more controlled explosion and a longer barrel . A further step forward was the introduction of chemically different brown powder which combusted more slowly again . It also put less stress on the insides of the barrel , allowing guns to last longer and to be manufactured to tighter tolerances . 
 The development of smokeless powder , based on nitroglycerine or nitrocellulose , by the French inventor Paul Vielle in 1884 was a further step allowing smaller charges of propellant with longer barrels . The guns of the pre @-@ Dreadnought battleships of the 1890s tended to be smaller in calibre compared to the ships of the 1880s , most often 12 in ( 305 mm ) , but progressively grew in length of barrel , making use of improved propellants to gain greater muzzle velocity . 
 The nature of the projectiles also changed during the ironclad period . Initially , the best armor @-@ piercing projectile was a solid cast @-@ iron shot . Later , shot of chilled iron , a harder iron alloy , gave better armor @-@ piercing qualities . Eventually the armor @-@ piercing shell was developed . 
 
 = = = Positioning of armament = = = 
 
 
 = = = = Broadside ironclads = = = = 
 
 The first British , French and Russian ironclads , in a logical development of warship design from the long preceding era of wooden ships of the line , carried their weapons in a single line along their sides and so were called " broadside ironclads . " Both Gloire and HMS Warrior were examples of this type . Because their armor was so heavy , they could only carry a single row of guns along the main deck on each side rather than a row on each deck . 
 A significant number of broadside ironclads were built in the 1860s , principally in Britain and France , but in smaller numbers by other powers including Italy , Austria , Russia and the United States . The advantages of mounting guns on both broadsides was that the ship could engage more than one adversary at a time , and the rigging did not impede the field of fire . 
 Broadside armament also had disadvantages , which became more serious as ironclad technology developed . Heavier guns to penetrate ever @-@ thicker armor meant that fewer guns could be carried . Furthermore , the adoption of ramming as an important tactic meant the need for ahead and all @-@ round fire . These problems led to broadside designs being superseded by designs that gave greater all @-@ round fire , which included central @-@ battery , turret , and barbette designs . 
 
 = = = = Turrets , batteries and barbettes = = = = 
 
 There were two main design alternatives to the broadside . In one design , the guns were placed in an armoured casemate amidships : this arrangement was called the ' box @-@ battery ' or ' centre @-@ battery ' . In the other , the guns could be placed on a rotating platform to give them a broad field of fire ; when fully armored , this arrangement was called a turret and when partially armored or unarmored , a barbette . 
 The centre @-@ battery was the simpler and , during the 1860s and 1870s , the more popular method . Concentrating guns amidships meant the ship could be shorter and handier than a broadside type . The first full @-@ scale centre @-@ battery ship was HMS Bellerophon of 1865 ; the French laid down centre @-@ battery ironclads in 1865 which were not completed until 1870 . Centre @-@ battery ships often , but not always , had a recessed freeboard enabling some of their guns to fire directly ahead . 
 The turret was first used in naval combat on the USS Monitor in 1862 , with a type of turret designed by the Swedish engineer John Ericsson . A competing turret design was proposed by the British inventor Cowper Coles with a prototype of this installed on HMS Trusty in 1861 for testing and evaluation purposes . Ericsson 's turret turned on a central spindle , and Coles 's turned on a ring of bearings . Turrets offered the maximum arc of fire from the guns , but there were significant problems with their use in the 1860s . The fire arc of a turret would be considerably limited by masts and rigging , so they were unsuited to use on the earlier ocean @-@ going ironclads . The second problem was that turrets were extremely heavy . Ericsson was able to offer the heaviest possible turret ( guns and armour protection ) by deliberately designing a ship with very low freeboard . The weight thus saved from having a high broadside above the waterline was diverted to actual guns and armour . Low freeboard , however , also meant a smaller hull and therefore a smaller capacity for coal storage — and therefore range of the vessel . In many respects , the turreted , low @-@ freeboard Monitor and the broadside sailer HMS Warrior represented two opposite extremes in what an ' Ironclad ' was all about . The most dramatic attempt to compromise these two extremes , or ' squaring this circle ' , was designed by Captain Cowper Phipps Coles : HMS Captain , a dangerously low freeboard turret ship which nevertheless carried a full rig of sail , and which subsequently capsized not long after her launch in 1870 . Her half @-@ sister HMS Monarch was restricted to firing from her turrets only on the port and starboard beams . The third Royal Navy ship to combine turrets and masts was HMS Inflexible of 1876 , which carried two turrets on either side of the centre @-@ line , allowing both to fire fore , aft and broadside . 
 A lighter alternative to the turret , particularly popular with the French navy , was the barbette . These were fixed armored towers which held a gun on a turntable . The crew was sheltered from direct fire , but vulnerable to plunging fire , for instance from shore emplacements . The barbette was lighter than the turret , needing less machinery and no roof armor — though nevertheless some barbettes were stripped of their armor plate to reduce the top @-@ weight of their ships . The barbette became widely adopted in the 1880s , and with the addition of an armored ' gun @-@ house ' , transformed into the turrets of the pre @-@ Dreadnought battleships . 
 
 = = = Torpedoes = = = 
 
 The ironclad age saw the development of explosive torpedoes as naval weapons , which helped complicate the design and tactics of ironclad fleets . The first torpedoes were static mines , used extensively in the American Civil War . That conflict also saw the development of the spar torpedo , an explosive charge pushed against the hull of a warship by a small boat . For the first time , a large warship faced a serious threat from a smaller one — and given the relative inefficiency of shellfire against ironclads , the threat from the spar torpedo was taken seriously . The U.S. Navy converted four of its monitors to become turretless armored spar @-@ torpedo vessels while under construction in 1864 – 5 , but these vessels never saw action . Another proposal , the towed or ' Harvey ' torpedo , involved an explosive on a line or outrigger ; either to deter a ship from ramming or to make a torpedo attack by a boat less suicidal . 
 A more practical and influential weapon was the self @-@ propelled or Whitehead torpedo . Invented in 1868 and deployed in the 1870s , the Whitehead torpedo formed part of the armament of ironclads of the 1880s like HMS Inflexible and the Italian Caio Duilio and Enrico Dandolo . The ironclad 's vulnerability to the torpedo was a key part of the critique of armored warships made by the Jeune Ecole school of naval thought ; it appeared that any ship armored enough to prevent destruction by gunfire would be slow enough to be easily caught by torpedo . In practice , however , the Jeune Ecole was only briefly influential and the torpedo formed part of the confusing mixture of weapons possessed by ironclads . 
 
 = = Armor and construction = = 
 
 The first ironclads were built on wooden or iron hulls , and protected by wrought iron armor backed by thick wooden planking . Ironclads were still being built with wooden hulls into the 1870s . 
 
 = = = Hulls : iron , wood and steel = = = 
 
 Using iron construction for warships offered advantages for the engineering of the hull . However , unarmored iron had many military disadvantages , and offered technical problems which kept wooden hulls in use for many years , particularly for long @-@ range cruising warships . 
 Iron ships had first been proposed for military use in the 1820s . In the 1830s and 1840s , France , Britain and the United States had all experimented with iron @-@ hulled but unarmored gunboats and frigates . However , the iron @-@ hulled frigate was abandoned by the end of the 1840s , because iron hulls were more vulnerable to solid shot ; iron was more brittle than wood , and iron frames more likely to fall out of shape than wood . 
 The unsuitability of unarmored iron for warship hulls meant that iron was only adopted as a building material for battleships when protected by armor . However , iron gave the naval architect many advantages . Iron allowed larger ships and more flexible design , for instance the use of watertight bulkheads on the lower decks . Warrior , built of iron , was longer and faster than the wooden @-@ hulled Gloire . Iron could be produced to order and used immediately , in contrast to the need to give wood a long period of seasoning . And , given the large quantities of wood required to build a steam warship and the falling cost of iron , iron hulls were increasingly cost @-@ effective . The main reason for the French use of wooden hulls for the ironclad fleet built in the 1860s was that the French iron industry could not supply enough , and the main reason why Britain built its handful of wooden @-@ hulled ironclads was to make best use of hulls already started and wood already bought . 
 Wooden hulls continued to be used for long @-@ range and smaller ironclads , because iron nevertheless had a significant disadvantage . Iron hulls suffered quick fouling by marine life , slowing the ships down — manageable for a European battlefleet close to dry docks , but a difficulty for long @-@ range ships . The only solution was to sheath the iron hull first in wood and then in copper , a laborious and expensive process which made wooden construction remain attractive . Iron and wood were to some extent interchangeable : the Japanese Kongō and Hiei ordered in 1875 were sister @-@ ships , but one was built of iron and the other of composite construction . 
 After 1872 , steel started to be introduced as a material for construction . Compared to iron , steel allows for greater structural strength for a lower weight . The French Navy led the way with the use of steel in its fleet , starting with the Redoutable , laid down in 1873 and launched in 1876 . Redoutable nonetheless had wrought iron armor plate , and part of her exterior hull was iron rather than steel . 
 Even though Britain led the world in steel production , the Royal Navy was slow to adopt steel warships . The Bessemer process for steel manufacture produced too many imperfections for large @-@ scale use on ships . French manufacturers used the Siemens @-@ Martin process to produce adequate steel , but British technology lagged behind . The first all @-@ steel warships built by the Royal Navy were the dispatch vessels Iris and Mercury , laid down in 1875 and 1876 . 
 
 = = = Armor and protection schemes = = = 
 
 Iron @-@ built ships used wood as part of their protection scheme . HMS Warrior was protected by 4 @.@ 5 in ( 114 mm ) of wrought iron backed by 15 in ( 381 mm ) of teak , the strongest shipbuilding wood . The wood played two roles , preventing spalling and also preventing the shock of a hit damaging the structure of the ship . Later , wood and iron were combined in ' sandwich ' armor , for instance in HMS Inflexible . 
 Steel was also an obvious material for armor . It was tested in the 1860s , but the steel of the time was too brittle and disintegrated when struck by shells . Steel became practical to use when a way was found to fuse steel onto wrought iron plates , giving a form of compound armor . This compound armor was used by the British in ships built from the late 1870s , first for turret armor ( starting with HMS Inflexible ) and then for all armor ( starting with HMS Colossus of 1882 ) . The French and German navies adopted the innovation almost immediately , with licenses being given for the use of the ' Wilson System ' of producing fused armor . 
 The first ironclads to have all @-@ steel armor were the Italian Caio Duilio and Enrico Dandolo . Though the ships were laid down in 1873 their armor was not purchased from France until 1877 . The French navy decided in 1880 to adopt compound armor for its fleet , but found it limited in supply , so from 1884 the French navy was using steel armor . Britain stuck to compound armor until 1889 . 
 The ultimate ironclad armor was case hardened nickel @-@ steel . In 1890 , the U.S. Navy tested steel armor hardened by the Harvey process and found it superior to compound armor . For several years ' Harvey steel ' was the state of the art , produced in the U.S. , France , Germany , Britain , Austria and Italy . In 1894 , the German firm Krupp developed gas cementing , which further hardened steel armor . The German Kaiser Friedrich III , laid down in 1895 , was the first ship to benefit from the new ' Krupp armor ' and the new armor was quickly adopted ; the Royal Navy using it from HMS Canopus , laid down in 1896 . By 1901 almost all new battleships used Krupp armor , though the U.S. continued to use Harvey armor alongside until the end of the decade . 
 The equivalent strengths of the different armor plates was as follows : 15 in ( 381 mm ) of wrought iron was equivalent to 12 in ( 305 mm ) of either plain steel or compound iron and steel armor , and to 7 @.@ 75 in ( 197 mm ) of Harvey armor or 5 @.@ 75 in ( 146 mm ) of Krupp armor . 
 Ironclad construction also prefigured the later debate in battleship design between tapering and ' all @-@ or @-@ nothing ' armour design . Warrior was only semi @-@ armoured , and could have been disabled by hits on the bow and stern . As the thickness of armor grew to protect ships from the increasingly heavy guns , the area of the ship which could be fully protected diminished . Inflexible 's armor protection was largely limited to the central citadel amidships , protecting boilers and engines , turrets and magazines , and little else . An ingenious arrangement of cork @-@ filled compartments and watertight bulkheads was intended to keep her stable and afloat in the event of heavy damage to her un @-@ armored sections . 
 
 = = Propulsion : steam and sail = = 
 
 The first ocean @-@ going ironclads carried masts and sails like their wooden predecessors , and these features were only gradually abandoned . Early steam engines were inefficient ; the wooden steam fleet of the Royal Navy could only carry " 5 to 9 days coal " , and the situation was similar with the early ironclads . Warrior also illustrates two design features which aided hybrid propulsion ; she had retractable screws to reduce drag while under sail ( though in practice the steam engine was run at a low throttle ) , and a telescopic funnel which could be folded down to the deck level . 
 Ships designed for coastal warfare , like the floating batteries of the Crimea , or USS Monitor and her sisters , dispensed with masts from the beginning . The British HMS Devastation , started in 1869 , was the first large , ocean @-@ going ironclad to dispense with masts . Her principal role was for combat in the English Channel and other European waters ; and while her coal supplies gave her enough range to cross the Atlantic , she would have had little endurance on the other side of the ocean . The Devastation and the similar ships commissioned by the British and Russian navies in the 1870s were the exception rather than the rule . Most ironclads of the 1870s retained masts , and only the Italian navy , which during that decade was focused on short @-@ range operations in the Adriatic , built consistently mastless ironclads . 
 During the 1860s , steam engines improved with the adoption of double @-@ expansion steam engines , which used 30 – 40 % less coal than earlier models . The Royal Navy decided to switch to the double @-@ expansion engine in 1871 , and by 1875 they were widespread . However , this development alone was not enough to herald the end of the mast . Whether this was due to a conservative desire to retain sails , or was a rational response to the operational and strategic situation , is a matter of debate . A steam @-@ only fleet would require a network of coaling stations worldwide , which would need to be fortified at great expense to stop them falling into enemy hands . Just as significantly , because of unsolved problems with the technology of the boilers which provided steam for the engines , the performance of double @-@ expansion engines was rarely as good in practice as it was in theory . 
 During the 1870s the distinction grew between ' first @-@ class ironclads ' or ' battleships ' on the one hand , and ' cruising ironclads ' designed for long @-@ range work on the other . The demands on first @-@ class ironclads for very heavy armor and armament meant increasing displacement , which reduced speed under sail ; and the fashion for turrets and barbettes made a sailing rig increasingly inconvenient . HMS Inflexible , launched in 1876 but not commissioned until 1881 , was the last British battleship to carry masts , and these were widely seen as a mistake . The start of the 1880s saw the end of sailing rig on ironclad battleships . 
 Sails persisted on ' cruising ironclads ' for much longer . During the 1860s , the French navy had produced the Alma and La Galissonnière classes as small , long @-@ range ironclads as overseas cruisers and the British had responded with ships like HMS Swiftsure of 1870 . The Russian ship General @-@ Admiral , laid down in 1870 and completed in 1875 , was a model of a fast , long @-@ range ironclad which was likely to be able to outrun and outfight ships like Swiftsure . Even the later HMS Shannon , often described as the first British armored cruiser , would have been too slow to outrun General @-@ Admiral . While Shannon was the last British ship with a retractable propellor , later armored cruisers of the 1870s retained sailing rig , sacrificing speed under steam in consequence . It took until 1881 for the Royal Navy to lay down a long @-@ range armored warship capable of catching enemy commerce raiders , HMS Warspite , which was completed in 1888 . While sailing rigs were obsolescent for all purposes by the end of the 1880s , rigged ships were in service until the early years of the 20th century . 
 The final evolution of ironclad propulsion was the adoption of the triple @-@ expansion steam engine , a further refinement which was first adopted in HMS Sans Pareil , laid down in 1885 and commissioned in 1891 . Many ships also used a forced draught to get additional power from their engines , and this system was widely used until the introduction of the steam turbine in the mid @-@ 1900s ( decade ) . 
 
 = = Fleets = = 
 
 While ironclads spread rapidly in navies worldwide , there were few pitched naval battles involving ironclads . Most European nations settled differences on land , and the Royal Navy struggled to maintain a deterrent parity with at least France , while providing suitable protection to Britain 's commerce and colonial outposts worldwide . Ironclads remained , for the British Royal Navy , a matter of defending the British Isles first and projecting power abroad second . Those naval engagements of the latter half of the 19th @-@ century which involved ironclads normally involved colonial actions or clashes between second @-@ rate naval powers . But these encounters were often enough to convince British policy @-@ makers of the increasing hazards of strictly naval foreign intervention , from Hampton Roads in the American Civil War to the hardening combined defences of naval arsenals such as Kronstadt and Cherbourg . 
 There were many types of ironclads : 
 Seagoing ships intended to " stand in the line of battle " ; the precursors of the battleship . 
 Coastal service and riverine vessels , including ' floating batteries ' and ' monitors' 
 Vessels intended for commerce raiding or protection of commerce , called ' armoured cruisers' 
 
 = = = Navies = = = 
 
 The United Kingdom possessed the largest navy in the world for the whole of the ironclad period . The Royal Navy was the second to adopt ironclad warships , and it applied them worldwide in their whole range of roles . In the age of sail , the British strategy for war depended on the Royal Navy mounting a blockade of the ports of the enemy . Because of the limited endurance of steamships , this was no longer possible , so the British at times considered the risk @-@ laden plan of engaging an enemy fleet in harbor as soon as war broke out . To this end , the Royal Navy developed a series of ' coast @-@ defence battleships ' , starting with the Devastation class . These ' breastwork monitors ' were markedly different from the other high @-@ seas ironclads of the period and were an important precursor of the modern battleship . As long @-@ range monitors they could reach Bermuda unescorted , for example . However , they were still armed with only four heavy guns and were as vulnerable to mines and obstructions ( and enemy monitors ) as the original monitors of the Union Navy proved to be during the Civil War . The British prepared for an overwhelming mortar bombardment of Kronstadt by the close of the Crimean War , but never considered running the smoke @-@ ridden , shallow @-@ water gauntlet straight to St. Petersburg with ironclads . Likewise , monitors proved acutely unable to ' overwhelm ' enemy fortifications single @-@ handed during the American conflict , though their low @-@ profile and heavy armour protection made them ideal for running gauntlets . Mines and obstructions , however , negated these advantages — a problem the British Admiralty frequently acknowledged but never countered throughout the period . The British never laid down enough Devastation @-@ class ' battleships ' to instantly overwhelm Cherbourg , Kronstadt or even New York City with gunfire . Although throughout the 1860s and 1870s the Royal Navy was still in many respects superior to its potential rivals , by the early 1880s widespread concern about the threat from France and Germany culminated in the Naval Defence Act , which promulgated the idea of a ' two @-@ power standard ' , that Britain should possess as many ships as the next two navies combined . This standard provoked aggressive shipbuilding in the 1880s and 1890s . 
 British ships did not participate in any major wars in the ironclad period . The Royal Navy 's ironclads only saw action as part of colonial battles or one @-@ sided engagements like the bombardment of Alexandria in 1882 . Defending British interests against Ahmed ' Urabi 's Egyptian revolt , a British fleet opened fire on the fortifications around the port of Alexandria . A mixture of centre @-@ battery and turret ships bombarded Egyptian positions for most of a day , forcing the Egyptians to retreat ; return fire from Egyptian guns was heavy at first , but inflicted little damage , killing only five British sailors . Few Egyptian guns were actually dismounted , on the other hand , and the fortifications themselves were typically left intact . Had the Egyptians actually utilised the heavy mortars that were at their disposal , they might have quickly turned the tide , for the attacking British ironclads found it easy ( for accuracy 's sake ) to simply anchor whilst firing — perfect targets for high @-@ angle fire upon their thinly armoured topdecks . 
 The French navy built the first ironclad to try to gain a strategic advantage over the British , but were consistently out @-@ built by the British . Despite taking the lead with a number of innovations like breech @-@ loading weapons and steel construction , the French navy could never match the size of the Royal Navy . In the 1870s , the construction of ironclads ceased for a while in France as the Jeune Ecole school of naval thought took prominence , suggesting that torpedo boats and unarmored cruisers would be the future of warships . Like the British , the French navy saw little action with its ironclads ; the French blockade of Germany in the Franco @-@ Prussian War was ineffective , as the war was settled entirely on land . 
 Russia built a number of ironclads , generally copies of British or French designs . Nonetheless , there were real innovations from Russia ; the first true type of ironclad armored cruiser , the General @-@ Admiral of the 1870s , and a set of remarkably badly designed circular battleships referred to as ' popovkas ' ( for Admiral Popov , who conceived the design ) . The Russian Navy pioneered the wide @-@ scale use of torpedo boats during the Russo @-@ Turkish War of 1877 – 1878 , mainly out of necessity because of the superior numbers and quality of ironclads used by the Turkish navy . Russia expanded her navy in the 1880s and 1890s with modern armored cruisers and battleships , but the ships were manned by inexperienced crews and politically appointed leadership , which enhanced their defeat in the Battle of Tsushima on 27 May 1905 . 
 The U.S. Navy ended the Civil War with about fifty monitor @-@ type coastal ironclads ; by the 1870s most of these were laid up in reserve , leaving the USA virtually without an ironclad fleet . Another five large monitors were ordered in the 1870s . The limitations of the monitor type effectively prevented the USA from projecting power overseas , and until the 1890s the USA would have come off badly in a conflict with even Spain or the Latin American powers . The 1890s saw the beginning of what became the Great White Fleet , and it was the modern pre @-@ Dreadnoughts and armored cruisers built in the 1890s which defeated the Spanish fleet in the Spanish – American War of 1898 . This started a new era of naval warfare . 
 Ironclads were widely used in South America . Both sides used ironclads in the Chincha Islands War between Spain and the combined forces of Peru and Chile in the early 1860s . The powerful Spanish Numancia participated in the Battle of Callao but was unable to inflict significant damage to the Callao defences . Besides , Peru was able to deploy two locally built ironclads based on American Civil War designs , the Loa ( a wooden ship converted into a casemate ironclad ) and the Victoria ( a small monitor armed with a single 68 @-@ pdr gun ) , as well as two British @-@ built ironclads : Independencia , a centre @-@ battery ship , and the turret ship Huáscar . Numancia was the first ironclad to circumnavigate the world , arriving in Cádiz on 20 September 1867 , and earning the motto : " Enloricata navis que primo terram circuivit " [ " First ironclad ship to sail around the world " ] ) . In the War of the Pacific in 1879 , both Peru and Chile had ironclad warships , including some of those used a few years previously against Spain . While the Independencia ran aground early on , the Peruvian ironclad ' Huáscar made a great impact against Chilean shipping , delaying Chilean ground invasion by six months . She was eventually caught by two more modern Chilean centre @-@ battery ironclads , the Blanco Encalada and the Almirante Cochrane at the Battle of Angamos Point . 
 Ironclads were also used from the inception of the Imperial Japanese Navy . The Kōtetsu ( Japanese : 甲鉄 , literally " Ironclad " , later renamed Azuma 東 , " East " ) had a decisive role in the Naval Battle of Hakodate Bay in May 1869 , which marked the end of the Boshin War , and the complete establishment of the Meiji Restoration . The IJN continued to develop its strength and commissioned a number of warships from British and European shipyards , first ironclads and later armored cruisers . These ships engaged the Chinese Beiyang fleet which was superior on paper at least at the Battle of the Yalu River . Thanks to superior short @-@ range firepower , the Japanese fleet came off better , sinking or severely damaging eight ships and receiving serious damage to only four . The naval war was concluded the next year at the Battle of Weihaiwei , where the strongest remaining Chinese ships were surrendered to the Japanese . 
 
 = = End of the ironclad warship = = 
 
 There is no clearly defined end to the ironclad , besides the transition from wood hulls to all @-@ metal . Ironclads continued to be used in World War I. Towards the end of the 19th century , the descriptions ' battleship ' and ' armored cruiser ' came to replace the term ' ironclad ' . 
 The proliferation of ironclad battleship designs came to an end in the 1890s as navies reached a consensus on the design of battleships , producing the type known as the pre @-@ Dreadnought . These ships are sometimes covered in treatments of the ironclad warship . The next evolution of battleship design , the dreadnought , is never referred to as an ' ironclad ' . 
 Most of the ironclads of the 1870s and 1880s served into the 1900s ( decade ) . For instance , a handful of US navy monitors laid down in the 1870s saw active service in World War I. Pre @-@ Dreadnought battleships and cruisers of the 1890s saw widespread action in World War I and in some cases through to World War II . 
 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 
 The example of the ironclads had some bearing on the history of the tank , as ironclad warships became an inspiration for ideas of landships and other armored vehicles . H. G. Wells , in his short story The Land Ironclads , published in The Strand Magazine in December 1903 , described the use of large , armoured cross @-@ country vehicles , armed with cannon and machine guns , and equipped with pedrail wheels 
 
 = = Today = = 
 
 A number of ironclads have been preserved or reconstructed as museum ships . 
 Parts of USS Monitor have been recovered and are being conserved and displayed at the Mariners ' Museum in Newport News , Virginia 
 HMS Warrior is today a fully restored museum ship in Portsmouth , England 
 Huáscar is berthed at the port of Talcahuano , Chile , on display for visitors . 
 The City @-@ class ironclad USS Cairo is currently on display in Vicksburg , Mississippi . 
 Northrop Grumman in Newport News constructed a full @-@ scale replica of USS Monitor . The replica was laid down in February 2005 and completed just two months later . 
 The Dutch Ramtorenschip ( Coastal ram ) Zr . Ms. Buffel is currently under display in the Maritime Museum Rotterdam . 
 The Dutch Ramtorenschip ( Coastal ram ) Zr . Ms. Schorpioen is a museum ship at Den Helder . 
 The complete , recovered wooden hull of the CSS Neuse , a casemate ram ironclad , is on view in Kinston , North Carolina , and , in another part of town on the Neuse River , the recreated ship , named CSS Neuse II , is nearly built and can be visited . 
 The hull of the casemate ironclad CSS Jackson can be seen in the National Civil War Naval Museum at Port Columbus , Georgia . 
 The new United States Navy Zumwalt @-@ class guided missile destroyer has been described as bearing resemblance to ironclads . 
 
 
 = Little Gidding ( poem ) = 
 
 Little Gidding is the fourth and final poem of T. S. Eliot 's Four Quartets , a series of poems that discuss time , perspective , humanity , and salvation . It was first published in September 1942 after being delayed for over a year because of the air @-@ raids on Great Britain during World War II and Eliot 's declining health . The title refers to a small Anglican community in Huntingdonshire , established by Nicholas Ferrar in the 17th century and scattered during the English Civil War . 
 The poem uses the combined image of fire and Pentecostal fire to emphasise the need for purification and purgation . According to the poet , humanity 's flawed understanding of life and turning away from God leads to a cycle of warfare , but this can be overcome by recognising the lessons of the past . Within the poem , the narrator meets a ghost that is a combination of various poets and literary figures . Little Gidding focuses on the unity of past , present , and future , and claims that understanding this unity is necessary for salvation . 
 
 = = Background = = 
 
 Following the completion of the third Four Quartets poem , The Dry Salvages , Eliot 's health declined and he stayed in Shamley Green , Surrey while he recovered . During this time , Eliot started writing Little Gidding . The first draft was completed in July 1941 but he was dissatisfied with it . He believed the problems with the poem lay with his own inability to write , and that , precipitated by air raids on London , he had started the poem with too little preparation and had written it too quickly . After the first draft was written , he set the poem aside , and he left in September to lecture throughout Great Britain . 
 After months of not working on the poem , Eliot began to feel compelled to finish it ; it was not until August 1942 , however , that he started working on it again . In total , there were five drafts . The poem was finished by 19 September 1942 and published in the October New English Weekly . Little Gidding was intended to conclude the Four Quartets series , summarising Eliot 's views expressed in this series of poems . 
 Little Gidding was the home of an Anglican community established in 1626 by Nicholas Ferrar . The Ferrar household lived a Christian life according to High Church principles and the Book of Common Prayer . The religious community was dispersed during the English Civil War between Parliamentarians and Royalists but reformed , ending with the death of John Ferrar in 1657 . Eliot had visited the site in May 1936 . 
 Unlike the other locations mentioned in the titles of the Four Quartets poems , Eliot had no direct connection to the original Christian community . As such , the community is supposed to represent almost any religious community . 
 
 = = Poem = = 
 
 Critics classify Little Gidding as a poem of fire with an emphasis on purgation and the Pentecostal fire . The beginning of the poem discusses time and winter , with attention paid to the arrival of summer . The images of snow , which provoke desires for a spiritual life , transition into an analysis of the four classical elements of fire , earth , air and water and how fire is the primary element of the four . Following this is a discussion on death and destruction , things unaccomplished , and regret for past events . 
 While using Dante 's terza rima style , the poem continues by describing the Battle of Britain . The image of warfare merges with the depiction of Pentecost , and the Holy Spirit is juxtaposed with the air @-@ raids on London . In the second section , a ghost , representing the poets of the past stuck between worlds , begins talking to the narrator of the poem . The ghost discusses change , art in general , and how humankind is flawed . The only way to overcome the problematic condition of humanity , according to the ghost , is to experience purgation through fire . The fire is described in a manner similar to Julian of Norwich 's writing about God 's love and discussed in relationship to the shirt of Nessus , a shirt that burns its wearer . Little Gidding continues by describing the eternalness of the present and how history exists in a pattern . The poem concludes by explaining how sacrifice is needed to allow an individual to die into life and be reborn , and that salvation should be the goal of humankind . 
 
 = = Themes = = 
 
 In terms of renewal , Eliot believed that suffering was needed for all of society before new life could begin . The original Little Gidding community was built for living on monastic lines , but the community was damaged and dispersed by Puritan forces during the English Civil War in 1646 . The church , the centre of the community , was restored in 1714 and again in 1853 . The image of religious renewal is combined with the image of the London air @-@ raids and the constant fighting and destruction within the world . This compound image is used to discuss the connection of holy places with the Holy Spirit , Pentecost , communion with the dead , and the repetition of history . The theme is also internal to Eliot 's own poems ; the image of the rose garden at the end Little Gidding is the image that begins Burnt Norton and the journey is made circular . Also , the depiction of time within the poem is similar to the way time operates within The Family Reunion . 
 Like the other poems making up the Four Quartets , Little Gidding deals with the past , present , and future , and humanity 's place within them as each generation is seemingly united . In the second section , there is a ghost who is the compilation of various poets , including Dante , Swift , Yeats , and others . When the ghost joins the poet , the narrator states " Knowing myself yet being someone other " . This suggests that the different times merge at the same time that the different personalities begin to merge , allowing a communication and connection with the dead . Later , in the fourth section , humanity is given a choice between the Holy Spirit or the bombing of London ; redemption or destruction . God 's love allows humankind to be redeemed and escape the living hell through purgation by fire . The end of the poem describes how Eliot has attempted to help the world as a poet . He parallels his work in language with working on the soul or working on society . 
 The ghost , a combination of many literary figures , was originally addressed in the poem as " Ser Brunetto " before being revised as an ambiguous " you " . " Ser Brunetto " was Dante 's way of addressing Brunetto Latini , a former mentor whom he meets in Hell to which he has been condemned for sodomy . Eliot , in a letter to John Hayward dated 27 August 1942 , explained why he changed the wording : 
 I think you will recognise that it was necessary to get rid of Brunetto for two reasons . The first is that the visionary figure has now become somewhat more definite and will no doubt be identified by some readers with Yeats though I do not mean anything so precise as that . However , I do not wish to take the responsibility of putting Yeats or anybody else into Hell and I do not want to impute to him the particular vice which took Brunetto there . Secondly , although the reference to that Canto is intended to be explicit , I wish the effect of the whole to be Purgatorial which is more appropriate . That brings us to the reference to swimming in fire which you will remember at the end of Purgatorio 26 where the poets are found . 
 The theme of swimming through flames is connected to the depiction of Guido Guinizelli , a poet that influenced Dante , seeking such a state in Purgatorio XXVI . However , the depiction of swimming was transformed into an image of dancing , an act that appears throughout Yeats 's poetry , within purgatorial flames . The critic Dominic Manganiello suggests that , in combining the image of dancing with purgation , Eliot merges Dante 's and Yeats 's poetic themes . 
 
 = = Reception = = 
 
 Critics such as Malcolm Cowley and Delmore Schwartz describe mixed emotions about the religiosity of the poem . Cowley emphasised the mystical nature of the poem and how its themes were closer to Buddhism than Anglicanism while mentioning his appreciation of many of the passages . Schwartz also mentioned the Buddhist images and his admiration for many of the lines in Little Gidding . F. B. Pinion believed that the fourth section of the poem costs " Eliot more trouble and vexation than any passage of the same length he ever wrote , and is his greatest achievement in the Four Quartets . " E. M. Forster did not like Eliot 's emphasis on pain and responded to the poem : " Of course there 's pain on and off through each individual 's life ... You can 't shirk it and so on . But why should it be endorsed by the schoolmaster and sanctified by the priest until the fire and the rose are one when so much of it is caused by disease and bullies ? It is here that Eliot becomes unsatisfactory as a seer . " Writing in 2003 , Roger Scruton wrote that in " Little Gidding " Eliot achieved " that for which he envies Dante — namely , a poetry of belief , in which belief and words are one , and in which the thought cannot be prized free from the controlled and beautiful language " . 
 
 
 = The Portage to San Cristobal of A.H. = 
 
 The Portage to San Cristobal of A.H. is a 1981 literary and philosophical novella by George Steiner , in which Jewish Nazi hunters find a fictional Adolf Hitler ( A.H. ) alive in the Amazon jungle thirty years after the end of World War II . The book generated considerable controversy after its publication because in it , Steiner , who is Jewish , allows Hitler to defend himself when he is put on trial in the jungle by his captors . There Hitler maintains that Israel owes its existence to the Holocaust and that he is the " benefactor of the Jews " . 
 The Portage to San Cristobal of A.H. was a 1983 finalist in the PEN / Faulkner Award for Fiction . It was adapted for the theatre by British playwright Christopher Hampton and was staged in London in April 1982 with Alec McCowen playing the part of Adolf Hitler . It was also staged in Hartford , Connecticut in the United States in 1983 and starred John Cullum as Hitler . 
 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 
 From his base in Tel Aviv , Holocaust survivor Emmanuel Lieber directs a group of Jewish Nazi hunters in search of Adolf Hitler . Lieber believes that the former Führer is still alive , and following rumours and hearsay , he tracks Hitler 's movements through South America , until after months of wading through swamps in the Amazon jungle , the search party finds the 90 @-@ year @-@ old alive in a clearing . Lieber flies to San Cristóbal where he awaits the group 's return with their captive . But getting the old man out of the jungle alive is more difficult than getting in , and their progress is further hampered by heavy thunderstorms . 
 Meanwhile , broken and incoherent radio messages between Lieber and the search party are intercepted by intelligence agents tracking their progress , and rumours begin to spread across the world of Hitler 's capture . Debates flare up over his impending trial , where it will be held and under whose jurisdiction . Orosso is identified as the nearest airfield to the last known location of the search party , and aircraft begin arriving at the hitherto unknown town . But when the search party loses radio contact with Lieber , they must make a decision : do they sit out the storms and deliver their captive to Lieber later , or do they try Hitler in the jungle before their prize is snatched from them by the world at large , who they know will be waiting ? Their decision is the latter , and against Lieber 's advice ( " You must not let him speak ... his tongue is like no other " ) they prepare for a trial with a judge , prosecution and defence attorneys selected from the members of the search party . Teku , a local Indian tracker , is asked to observe the trial as an independent witness . 
 The attention Hitler is receiving , however , renews his strength , and when the trial begins , he brushes aside his " defence attorney " and begins a long speech in four parts in his own defence : 
 Firstly , Hitler claims he took his doctrines from the Jews and copied the notion of the master race from the Chosen people and their need to separate themselves from the " unclean " . " My racism is a parody of yours , a hungry imitation . " 
 Hitler justifies the Final Solution by maintaining that the Jews ' God , purer than any other , enslaves its subjects , continually demanding more than they can give and " blackmailing " them with ideals that cannot be attained . The " virus of utopia " had to be stopped . 
 Hitler states that he was not the originator of evil . " [ Stalin ] had perfected genocide when I was still a nameless scribbler in Munich . " Further , Hitler asserts that the number of lives lost due to his actions are dwarfed by various world atrocities , including those in Russia , China and Africa . 
